## 9.12 Exercises on firewalls

For this experiment, we will reuse the same network as in the [previous experiment](el5373-lab9-909.md), with two hosts connected by a router.

### Exercise 8

On "romeo", execute 

```
sudo iptables -L -v
```

to list the existing rules in the filter table. Save the output for your lab report.

Append a rule to the end of the INPUT chain by executing

```
sudo iptables -A INPUT -v -p TCP --dport 23 -j DROP
```

Run

```
sudo iptables -L -v
```


again to display the filter table. Save the output.

On the "router", run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w iptables-drop-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture traffic between "romeo" and "juliet". While this is running, initiate a `telnet` connection from "juliet" to "romeo" - on "juliet", run

```
telnet romeo
```

Wait until your `telnet` process terminates (this may take some time), then stop the `tcpdump` and transfer the packet capture to your laptop with `scp`.


**Lab report**: Can you `telnet` to the host from the remote machine? Explain.

**Lab report**: From the `tcpdump` output, how many retries were attempted? Explain the exponential backoff algorithm of TCP timeout and retransmission, using your packet capture.


### Exercise 9

Delete the rule created in the last exercise - on "romeo", execute 

```
sudo iptables -D INPUT -v -p TCP --dport 23 -j DROP
```

Then, append a new rule to the INPUT chain: 

```
sudo iptables -A INPUT -v -p TCP --dport 23 -j REJECT --reject-with tcp-reset
```

Run

```
sudo iptables -L -v
```


to display the filter table. Save the output.

On the "router", run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w iptables-reset-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture traffic between "romeo" and "juliet". While this is running, initiate a `telnet` connection from "juliet" to "romeo" - on "juliet", run

```
telnet romeo
```

Wait until your `telnet` process terminates, then stop the `tcpdump` and transfer the packet capture to your laptop with `scp`.


**Lab report**: Explain the different between the `tcpdump` output in this exercise and the previous exercise. How many attempts did TCP make this time?
