## 9.10 Exercises on secure applications


For this experiment, we will reuse the same network as in the [previous experiment](el5373-lab9-909.md). However, we will need to make some changes to the host configuration.

The exercises in this section will focus on the *confidentiality* of network services - to what extent are services that offer remote login, file transfer, or web access, protected from disclosure to unauthorized individuals? 

Furthermore, we will focus on confidentiality with respect to malicious users who might be eavesdropping on network traffic.

### Exercise 4: Remote login

In this exercise, we will compare `telnet` and `SSH`, two applications used for remote login to a host. 

First, we will need to install and configure these services on the "server" node.

On "server", install the `telnet` service with

```
sudo apt-get update  
sudo apt-get -y install xinetd telnetd  
```

Then create the telnet configuration file with

```
sudo nano /etc/xinetd.d/telnet  
```

Paste the following into the file:

```
# default: on
# description: telnet server
service telnet  
{
disable = no  
flags = REUSE  
socket_type = stream  
wait = no  
user = root  
only_from = 10.0.0.0/8
server = /usr/sbin/in.telnetd  
log_on_failure += USERID  
}
```

Hit Ctrl+O and Enter to save the file, and Ctrl+X to exit nano. Finally, restart the telnet service on "server" with

```
sudo service xinetd restart  
```

You can check the service status with


```
service xinetd status
```

it should be "active (running)".

Next, we will start an SSH server process on the "server" host. Hosts on GENI already have SSH servers on them, but these are configured to allow remote access to GENI users and administrators. We will start a second, parallel SSH server process on "server", that will run on port 1000 on the experiment interface. ("Our" SSH server runs on a non-default port because the default port, 22, is already in use by the existing SSH server):

```
sudo /usr/sbin/sshd -o ListenAddress=10.10.2.100 -f /usr/share/openssh/sshd_config -p 1000
```

Finally, we need to set up a user account for remote access to the "server" host. On the "server", create a new user account with the username "shakespeare":

```
sudo useradd -m shakespeare -s /bin/sh  
```

Then run

```
sudo passwd shakespeare
```

and enter a password for "shakespeare" when prompted, then hit "Enter". (No characters will appear as you type.)

Now we are ready to compare the two remote access applications, with respect to security.

On the "romeo" host, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w security-telnet-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture traffic on the network segment. This packet capture will show you what is visible to anyone eavesdropping on the network segment.

While this is running, initiate a `telnet` connection from "romeo" to "server" - on "romeo", run

```
telnet server
```

When prompted for a "login", enter

```
shakespeare
```

and hit "Enter". Then, when prompted for a password, enter the password you set previously for the "shakespeare" user.

After you have successfully logged in using `telnet`, type 

```
date
```

and hit "Enter", and then type

```
exit
```

in the `telnet` session and hit "Enter" to end it. Stop the `tcpdump` with Ctrl+C.


Next, on the "romeo" host, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w security-ssh-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture traffic on the network segment. This packet capture will show you what is visible to anyone eavesdropping on the network segment.

While this is running, initiate an SSH connection from "romeo" to "server" on port 1000 - on "romeo", run

```
ssh shakespeare@server -p 1000
```

Type `yes` when prompted to confirm the connection. Then, when prompted for a password, enter the password you set previously for the "shakespeare" user.

After you have successfully logged in using SSH, type 

```
date
```

and hit "Enter", and then type

```
exit
```

in the SSH session and hit "Enter" to end it. Stop the `tcpdump` with Ctrl+C.

Transfer both packet captures to your laptop with `scp`, and analyze with Wireshark. Examine the individual packet payloads, and also use the Analyze > Follow > TCP Stream tool (while one of the packets in the TCP stream is selected).

**Lab report**: In the packet capture of the `telnet` experiment, can you read: the username and password? IP/TCP headers? Session data? Show evidence. 

**Lab report**: In the packet capture of the SSH experiment, can you read: the username and password? IP/TCP headers? Session data? Show evidence. 

### Exercise 5: File transfer

In this exercise, we will compare FTP and SFTP, two applications used for file transfer to and from a remote host. SFTP tunnels FTP traffic over an SSH session.

First, you'll need to install the SFTP server on the "server" node:

```
sudo apt-get -y install vsftpd
```

You should have already prepared a user account named "shakespeare" on the server node, in the previous exercise. We will use this account again.


On the "romeo" host, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w security-ftp-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture traffic on the network segment. This packet capture will show you what is visible to anyone eavesdropping on the network segment.


While this is running, initiate an FTP session from "romeo" to "server" - on "romeo", run

```
ftp server
```

When prompted for a "Name", enter

```
shakespeare
```

and hit "Enter". Then, when prompted for a password, enter the password you set previously for the "shakespeare" user.

After you have successfully authenticated your FTP session (you will see the message "230 Login successful"), you will see an FTP prompt. At the FTP prompt, type

```
cd /etc
```

and then 

```
get passwd
```

This will transfer a list of all usernames on the remote system over the FTP session. Finally, type 

```
exit
```

in the FTP session and hit "Enter" to end it. Stop the `tcpdump` running on the router with Ctrl+C.

You can run

```
cat passwd
```

on "romeo" to view the file that you transferred.


Next, on the "romeo" host, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w security-sftp-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture traffic on the network segment. This packet capture will show you what is visible to anyone eavesdropping on the network segment.

While this is running, initiate an SFTP connection from "romeo" to "server" on port 1000 - on "romeo", run

```
sftp -P 1000 shakespeare@server
```

When prompted for a password, enter the password you set previously for the "shakespeare" user.

At the SFTP prompt, type

```
cd /etc
```

and then 

```
get passwd
```

to retrieve the same file. Then, type 

```
exit
```

in the SFTP session and hit "Enter" to end it. Stop the `tcpdump` running on the router with Ctrl+C.


Transfer both packet captures to your laptop with `scp`, and analyze with Wireshark. Examine the individual packet payloads, and also use the Analyze > Follow > TCP Stream tool (while one of the packets in the TCP stream is selected).


**Lab report**: In the packet capture of the FTP experiment, can you read: the username and password? IP/TCP headers? The name of the file transferred, and the file contents? Show evidence. 

**Lab report**: In the packet capture of the SFTP experiment, can you read: the username and password? IP/TCP headers? The name of the file transferred, and the file contents? Show evidence. 


### Exercise: Web access

In this exercise, we'll compare HTTP and HTTPS (HTTP over SSL/TLS).

On the "server" node, install the Apache web server:

```
sudo apt -y install apache2
```

Then, generate a self-signed certificate and key for it, which will be used to authenticate the server and to establish an encrypted connection to the server:

```
sudo openssl req -x509 -nodes -days 365 -newkey rsa:2048 -keyout /etc/ssl/private/ssl-cert-snakeoil.key -out /etc/ssl/certs/ssl-cert-snakeoil.pem
```

and answer the questions when prompted. You can invent a fictional "Organization Name" and "Organizational Unit Name" for your server, but for the "Common Name" question, use the name listed under "Hostname" in the GENI Portal for the "server" node. 

For example:


```
Country Name (2 letter code) [AU]:US
State or Province Name (full name) [Some-State]:New York
Locality Name (eg, city) []:Brooklyn
Organization Name (eg, company) [Internet Widgits Pty Ltd]:NYU Tandon School of Engineering
Organizational Unit Name (eg, section) []:Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Common Name (e.g. server FQDN or YOUR name) []:server.lab9-new.ch-geni-net.instageni.idre.ucla.edu
Email Address []:ffund@nyu.edu
```

Now that we have the website certificate and key, we'll update the Apache configuration to use them.

Edit the config file for the SSL-enabled version of the site:

```
sudo nano /etc/apache2/sites-available/default-ssl.conf
```

After the `<VirtualHost _default_:443>` line, add a ServerName line with the hostname of the "server" host. Excluding comments, the config file will end up looking similar to the following:

```
<IfModule mod_ssl.c>
        <VirtualHost _default_:443>
                ServerName server.lab9-new.ch-geni-net.instageni.idre.ucla.edu
                ServerAdmin webmaster@localhost

                DocumentRoot /var/www/html

                SSLEngine on
                SSLCertificateFile      /etc/ssl/certs/ssl-cert-snakeoil.pem
                SSLCertificateKeyFile /etc/ssl/private/ssl-cert-snakeoil.key
        </VirtualHost>
</IfModule>
```

(although there may be some additional lines not shown here.)

Enable the SSL module for Apache and the new SSL-enabled site, and restart the service:

```
sudo a2enmod ssl
sudo a2ensite default-ssl.conf
sudo systemctl restart apache2
```

Finally, create a form for data entry on your new site. Open a new HTML file with


```
sudo nano /var/www/html/form.html
```


and place the following HTML inside this file:

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <body>
    <form action="/done.html">
      <label for="fname">First name:</label><br>
      <input type="text" id="fname" name="fname" value="John"><br>
      <label for="lname">Last name:</label><br>
      <input type="text" id="lname" name="lname" value="Doe"><br><br>
      <input type="submit" value="Submit">
    </form>
  </body>
</html>
```

Save with Ctrl+O, then use Ctrl+X to quit `nano`.

Open a new HTML file with


```
sudo nano /var/www/html/done.html
```


and place the following HTML inside this file:

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
  <body>
    <h1>Done!</h1>
  </body>
</html>
```

Save with Ctrl+O, then use Ctrl+X to quit `nano`.

Now that everything is prepared on the server. We'll compare HTTP vs. HTTPS access to this web form. 


On the "romeo" host, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w security-http-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture traffic on the network segment. This packet capture will show you what is visible to anyone eavesdropping on the network segment.

While this is running, initiate an HTTP session from "romeo" to "server" - on "romeo", run

```
lynx http://server/form.html
```

Fill in the form fields (you can use Tab or Enter to navigate to the next field), then navigate to the Submit button control and hit Enter to submit your form. You should see a "Done!" message. Then, type `q` to quit and `y` to confirm your choice.


Stop the `tcpdump` with Ctrl+C.


Next, on the "romeo" host, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w security-https-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture traffic on the network segment. This packet capture will show you what is visible to anyone eavesdropping on the network segment.


While this is running, initiate an HTTPS connection from "romeo" to "server" - on "romeo", run

```
lynx https://server/form.html
```


You'll be warned that you are trying to access a site with a certificate that is not trusted, since our site has a self-signed certificate. Type `y` to continue. Next, you'll be warned that the name of the server doesn't match the certificate name. Type `y` to continue anyway. Finally, you'll see the same form.


Fill in the form fields (you can use Tab or Enter to navigate to the next field), then navigate to the Submit button control and hit Enter to submit your form. 

Before you get to the "Done!" message, you'll have to confirm _again_ that you want to accept the self-signed certificate (`y`) and that you want to continue even though the server name doesn't match (`y`).

Once you see a "Done!" message, type `q` to quit and `y` to confirm your choice.


Stop the `tcpdump` with Ctrl+C.


Once you are done with this part of the lab , proceed to the [next part](el5373-lab9-91x.md).


**Lab report**: In the packet capture of the HTTP experiment, can you read: the IP and TCP headers? The contents of the HTTP GET (including the name of the page you visited, `form.html`)? The data you entered in the form? Show evidence. 

**Lab report**: In the packet capture of the HTTPS experiment, can you read: the IP and TCP headers? The contents of the HTTP GET (including the name of the page you visited, `form.html`)? The data you entered in the form? Show evidence. 
