## 9.9 SNMP exercises

For this experiment, we will use a topology with two workstations (named "romeo" and "juliet"), and a router in between them, with IP addresses configured as follows:

* romeo: 10.10.1.100
* router, interface connected to romeo: 10.10.1.1
* router, interface connected to juliet: 10.10.2.1
* juliet: 10.10.2.100

each with a netmask of 255.255.255.0.

To set up this topology in the GENI Portal, create a slice, click on "Add Resources", and load the RSpec from the following URL: [https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ffund/tcp-ip-essentials/master/lab9/lab9-security-rspec.xml](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ffund/tcp-ip-essentials/master/lab9/lab9-security-rspec.xml)

Then bind to an InstaGENI site and reserve your resources. Wait for them to become available for login ("turn green" on your canvas) and then SSH into each, using the details given in the GENI Portal.

We will also need to make some changes to the end host configuration, and install some software. In this exercise, we will see how SNMP can be used to monitor networked devices.

First, we need to download MIBs on all three hosts in the topology. On each one, open the configuration file for the package manager with

```
sudo nano /etc/apt/sources.list
```

and add the line

```
deb http://us.archive.ubuntu.com/ubuntu/ xenial multiverse
```

to the end. Hit Ctrl+O and Enter to save the file, and Ctrl+X to exit `nano`. Next, run

```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get -y install snmp-mibs-downloader
```

Then run

```
sudo download-mibs
```


On the "router" node, install the SNMP daemon with:

```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get -y install snmpd
```

On the "romeo" and "juliet" nodes, install the SNMP client with:

```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get -y install snmp
```

Finally, on all three hosts, run


```
sudo cp -R /var/lib/mibs/ietf /usr/share/snmp/mibs/
sudo cp -R /var/lib/mibs/iana /usr/share/snmp/mibs/
```


Before you start, use `ifconfig -a` to capture the network interface configuration of each host in this topology. Draw a diagram of the topology, and label each network interface with its name, IP address, and MAC address. Include this diagram as an appendix to your lab report.


### Exercise 1: Configuring SNMP

On the "router" node, use

```
service snmpd status
```

to verify that the SNMP daemon is running. Try to stop it with

```
sudo service snmpd stop
```

and start it again with

```
sudo service snmpd start
```

The SNMP configuration file is located at `/etc/snmp/snmpd.conf`.  Make a copy of this file with

```
sudo cp /etc/snmp/snmpd.conf /etc/snmp/snmpd.conf.save
```

Then, open the configuration file and study the configuration options with

```
sudo nano /etc/snmp/snmpd.conf
```

Note that lines not "commented out", i.e. not preceded by a `#` character, are active.

Make the following changes to the configuration:

1 - Comment out the line 

```
agentAddress  udp:127.0.0.1:161
```

and un-comment the line

```
#agentAddress udp:161,udp6:[::1]:161
```

2 - Un-comment the line

```
#rocommunity secret  10.0.0.0/16
```

and change it to read

```
rocommunity secret  10.10.1.0/24
```

Hit Ctrl+O and Enter to save the file, and Ctrl+X to exit `nano`.

Finally, restart the service with


```
sudo service snmpd restart
```

Use

```
service snmpd status
```

to verify that the SNMP daemon is running. If you made a mistake in editing the configuration file, then the service may fail at this point, so you'll need to go back and correct your mistake.

Also, examine the MIBs, which are located in the `/usr/share/snmp/mibs` directory and its subdirectories. In particular, study the interface MIB with

```
less /usr/share/snmp/mibs/ietf/IF-MIB
```

and the TCP MIB with

```
less /usr/share/snmp/mibs/ietf/TCP-MIB
```

**Lab report**: By default (before your changes to the configuration file), will the SNMP service allow connections from remote hosts? Explain what the effect of your change to the `agentAddress` option will be.

**Lab report**: Explain how the lines

```
view   systemonly  included   .1.3.6.1.2.1.1
view   systemonly  included   .1.3.6.1.2.1.25.1
rocommunity public  default    -V systemonly
```

work together. What MIBs can be read using the "public" community string? What MIBs can be edited using the "public" community string?

**Lab report**: What is the effect of adding the line

```
rocommunity secret  10.10.1.0/24
```

to the configuration file?

**Lab report**: What is the data type and the description of the MIB objects `IF-MIB::ifDescr`, `IF-MIB::ifInUcastPkts`, `IF-MIB::ifPhysAddress`, and `IF-MIB::ifOutUcastPkts`?


### Exercise 2: Retrieving SNMP data

We will use the `snmpwalk` utility to probe the SNMP daemon running on the router.

Open two SSH sessions to the "router" node. In one, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w snmpwalk-public-eth1-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

and in the other, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth2 -w snmpwalk-public-eth2-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

Leave these running.

On the "romeo" host, run

```
snmpwalk -v 2c -c public router
```

and on the "juliet" host, run the same command, 

```
snmpwalk -v 2c -c public router
```

Save the output for your lab report. Then, stop both `tcpdump` instances on the "router".

Next, we will try to probe using the "secret" community string. On the router, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w snmpwalk-secret-eth1-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

in one session, and

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth2 -w snmpwalk-secret-eth2-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

in the other. Leave these running.

On the "romeo" host, run

```
snmpwalk -v 2c -c secret router
```

and on the "juliet" host, run the same command, 

```
snmpwalk -v 2c -c secret router
```

Save the output (or at least, a subset of it) for your lab report. Then, stop both `tcpdump` instances on the "router".

Transfer the packet captures to your laptop with `scp`.

**Lab report**: What is the difference in the output when running `snmpwalk` on the "romeo" host with "public" as the community string, versus "secret" as the community string? Explain why this occurs, using evidence from the SNMP configuration file.

**Lab report**: What is the difference in the output when running  `snmpwalk` with "secret" as the community string on the "romeo" host, versus on the "juliet" host? Explain why this occurs, using evidence from the SNMP configuration file.

### Exercise 3: Retrieving SNMP data, continued


We can also use `snmpget` to get an individual MIB object, rather than probing a sequence of MIB objects.

On the router, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w snmpget-eth1-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

in one session, and

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth2 -w snmpget-eth2-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

in the other. Leave these running. Then, on "romeo", run

```
snmpget -v 2c -c secret router IF-MIB::ifDescr.4
snmpget -v 2c -c secret router IF-MIB::ifInUcastPkts.4
snmpget -v 2c -c secret router IF-MIB::ifPhysAddress.4
snmpget -v 2c -c secret router IF-MIB::ifOutUcastPkts.4
```

Save the output for your lab report.

Stop the `tcpdump` instances on the router, and then run

```
ifconfig
```

on the router. Save the output.

Transfer the packet captures to your laptop with `scp`.

**Lab report**: Show the relevant section of the `ifconfig` output on the router, and how it corresponds to the interface information you collected using SNMP.

**Lab report**: Draw the format of one of the (successful) SNMP response messages saved, including the name and value of each field.
