## 8.9 NTP exercises

For this experiment, we will reuse the same network as in the [previous experiment](el5373-lab8-87.md). 

### Exercise 6

On Linux, the `date` command is used to display and change the system time of a host. Use

```
man date
```

to see the manual page for this utility, and study its options and usages.

Try the following `date` commands:

```
date
date --date='2 days ago'
date --date='3 months 2 days' 
sudo date --set='+1 seconds'
date -r /tmp/date.txt
```

### Exercise 7

NTP can be used to determine the time offset between an NTP client and server as follows. First, the NTP client sends a packet containing its own timestamp to the server in the "Transmit Timestamp" field of an NTP packet. When the NTP server receives the packet, it responds with an NTP packet where the

* The "Origin Timestamp" is the time (according to the _client's_ system clock) when the request departed the client en route to the server. The server finds this from the "Transmit Timestamp" in the client's NTP packet
* The "Receive Timestamp" is the time (according to the _server's_ system clock) when it received the client's NTP request
* The "Transmit Timestamp" is the time (according to the _server's_ system clock) when it sends its NTP reply
* The "Reference Timestamp" is the time that the NTP server's system time was last set or corrected

When the client receives the reply, it computes four time values:

* **T1**: the "Origin Timestamp" from the NTP reply
* **T2**: the "Receive Timestamp" from the NTP reply
* **T3**: the "Transmit Timestamp" from the NTP reply
* **T4**: the time (according to the _client's_ system clock) at which the NTP reply is received by the client.

Using these time fields, the client will compute the round-trip transmission delay between the NTP client and server, as

δ = (T4 – T1) – (T3 – T2)

and the offset of the client clock from the server clock as

θ = 1/2 [(T2 – T1) + (T3 – T4)]


On Linux, the `ntpdate` command can be used to query an NTP server and to set the system time using NTP. Use

```
man ntpdate
```

to see the manual page for this utility, and study its options and usages.

Run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth0 'udp port 123' -w ntp-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

to capture NTP traffic. Note that

* We are monitoring on the "control" interface (`eth0`), not the "experiment" interface where we usually observe traffic. In this instance, we will generate traffic over the "control" interface by using `ntpdate` to query an NTP server on the public Internet.
* We are filtering the `tcpdump` to only capture traffic on UDP port 123 (the UDP port), otherwise the packet capture would be full of our SSH traffic, which is also carried through the "control" interface.

Then, while `tcpdump` is running, open another SSH session to the same host and run

```
ntpdate -p 1 -q pool.ntp.org
```

to query the NTP server at `pool.ntp.org`, requesting one sample from each time server.

Save the response for your lab report. Stop the `tcpdump` and transfer the packet capture to your laptop with `scp`.

**Lab report**: How many NTP servers did the client receive a response from? What stratum did each server belong to, and what is the significance of the "stratum"? Which of the servers that your NTP client contacted is most reliable, and why?

**Lab report**: Select _one_ NTP request and its associated response from your packet capture. For that NTP transaction, show the NTP request and response, and answer the following questions:

* What is **T1**, **T2**, and **T3**?
* Taking the timestamp shown in Wireshark as the "Arrival Time" in the frame header as approximately equal to **T4** (note: this timestamp is actually a bit _smaller_ than **T4**, since it represents the time at which the frame is received by the OS's networking system but not yet received by the NTP process), what is the delay δ and offset θ? Show your work. Compare the values you compute to those reported for this server in the `ntpdate` output. 

### Exercise 8

The Network Time Protocol daemon `ntpd` can be used to maintain system time in sync with NTP time servers. We will use it to synchronize the "romeo" and "juliet" hosts using NTP.

First, open two terminal windows, one to "romeo" and one to "juliet", and place them side-by-side in your display. In each, run

```
watch -n 0.1 timedatectl
```

on each host to show the output of the `timedatectl` command every 0.1 seconds. 

On a second terminal in each host, run

```
sudo service ntp stop
```

to stop the `ntp` service, if it is running.

Find the time offset between the two hosts (from the output of the `timedatectl` command). If there is no time offset, use the `date` command (as in Exercise 6) to adjust the system time of one of the hosts by a few seconds, so that there is a small offset.

Take a screenshot showing both windows simulataneously with the `timedatectl`. Annotate the screenshot to show the time offset between the two hosts.

Then, while `timedatectl` is running, use the second terminal on each host to run

```
sudo ntpd -gq -d 1 0.us.pool.ntp.org 1.us.pool.ntp.org
sudo service ntp start
```

on both "romeo" and "juliet", to sync them with the same NTP time servers and set the time using NTP.

Now, check the `timedatectl` output again. Take a screenshot showing both windows simultaneously, and compare the date/time offset between the two hosts.

Finally, run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth0 "udp port 123" 
```

on either host. Leave it running for a few minutes, to capture NTP queries sent by the client.

