## UDP as a connectionless transport protocol

For this experiment, we will use a topology with two workstations (named "romeo" and "juliet"), and a router in between them, with IP addresses configured as follows:

* romeo: 10.10.1.100
* router, interface connected to romeo: 10.10.1.1
* router, interface connected to juliet: 10.10.2.1
* juliet: 10.10.2.100

each with a netmask of 255.255.255.0. 

To set up this topology in the GENI Portal, create a slice, click on "Add Resources", and load the RSpec from the following URL: https://git.io/vFUGj

Then bind to an InstaGENI site and reserve your resources. Wait for them to become available for login ("turn green" on your canvas) and then SSH into each, using the details given in the GENI Portal.


### Setup


On both workstations, set up a route to reach the other workstation. 

On romeo, run

```
sudo route add -net 10.10.2.0/24 gw 10.10.1.1
```

and on juliet, run


```
sudo route add -net 10.10.1.0/24 gw 10.10.2.1
```

Next, we'll install and configure the `echo` service, which we'll use for this lab. On both workstations, run

```
sudo apt update
sudo apt -y install echoping xinetd
```

We will also need to edit the configuration file for the `echo` service, to enable it. Run

```
sudo nano /etc/xinetd.d/echo
```

on both workstations, to open the configuration file for editing. Change the line

```
        disable         = yes
```

to 


```
        disable         = no 
```

in *both* places where it appears, in each file.

Then use Ctrl+O and Enter to save the file, and Ctrl+X to quit.

Run

```
sudo cat /etc/xinetd.d/echo
```

to make sure the file contents are correct. It should look like [this](https://github.com/ffund/tcp-ip-essentials/blob/master/lab5/echo).

Then, run

```
sudo service xinetd restart
```

to apply the changes.

Traffic between romeo and juliet will be forwarded by the router. In this case, romeo, juliet, and the router are very close to one another (in network terms) so there is very little delay across the network. In a realistic network, there would be some delay as packets traverse the network. We will emulate this by adding some artificial delay.

On the router, run

```
sudo tc qdisc add dev eth1 root netem delay 10ms
sudo tc qdisc add dev eth2 root netem delay 10ms
```

Test this by running

```
ping -c 10 10.10.2.100
```

on romeo, to ping juliet. You should see a round trip time of a little over 20 ms.


### Exercise: UDP as a connectionless protocol

UDP is a very simple transport protocol. It adds a small header to the payload, then sends it directly to a target host, without establishing a connection first. This is in contrast to the other major transport protocol, TCP, which is a connection-oriented protocol.

This makes UDP useful for:

* Time-sensitive messages. Since we don't need to establish a connection before sending the message, it can reach its destination quickly. This is why UDP is often used for live audio and video, because a delay in packet delivery degrades the user experience for those applications.
* Network protocol traffic between devices. UDP avoids the computation and memory overhead of managing connections, and the extra network traffic due to connection establishment. For very small messages especially, extra network traffic due to connection establishment could add more load to the network than the message itself! This is why UDP is used to carry traffic for protocols like RIP, DNS, DHCP, NTP, and others.


On romeo, run


```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w $(hostname -s)-echoping.pcap
```

to capture packets. 

On a second terminal on romeo, run

```
echoping -f x -u 10.10.2.100
```

This will send a *UDP* message (filled with the letter 'x') to the `echo` service on juliet, which will immediately send back a response. The elapsed time (from when romeo starts the `echo`, until the response was received from juliet) will be printed in the terminal output. Save this output. 


Next, on romeo, run

```
echoping -f x 10.10.2.100
```

This will send a *TCP* message (filled with the letter 'x') to the `echo` service on juliet, which will immediately send back a response. The elapsed time (from when romeo sent the TCP message, until the response was received from juliet) will be printed in the terminal output. Save this output. 

Stop your `tcpdump` process.  


You can play back the UDP echo with

```
tcpdump -r $(hostname -s)-echoping.pcap -envX udp
```

and play back the TCP echo with

```
tcpdump -r $(hostname -s)-echoping.pcap -envX tcp
```

In this packet capture, look for the packets with a repeated `x` in the payload. This is the actual echo message and response! The rest is for establishing and breaking down the connection, and for making sure that messages are received. 

Use `scp` to transfer your packet capture to your laptop, and open it in Wireshark. 

Apply the `udp` display filter to look at just the UDP echo. Then, in the Wireshark menu, click on Statistics > Flow Graph. Check the box on the bottom left that says "Limit to display filter". You should see the UDP echo request and response, with arrows showing the direction of each message and the time shown on the far left. Take a screenshot for your lab report.

Close the flow graph, and apply the `tcp` display filter to look at just the TCP echo. Then, in the Wireshark menu, click on Statistics > Flow Graph. Check the box on the bottom left that says "Limit to display filter". You should see the TCP echo request and response, with arrows showing the direction of each message and the time shown on the far left. Take a screenshot for your lab report.

**Lab report**: Show the output of the `echoping` command and the Wireshark flow graph for the UDP echo and the TCP echo. 

**Lab report**: For the echo *with* connection establishment (TCP), 

* How much time elapses from when romeo starts to establish the connection (the time of the first packet in the TCP flow graph) until romeo actually sends the echo request (time of the echo request in the TCP flow graph)?
* How much time elapses from when romeo starts to establish the connection (the time of the first packet in the TCP flow graph) until romeo receives the echo response from juliet (time of the echo reponse in the TCP flow graph)?  This number should be similar to the output of the `echoping` command, although it may be slightly smaller because it does not include some application layer overhead.
* What percent of the total round trip time (from the output of the `echoping` command) is due to the connection establishment, before the echo request is even sent?
* In the UDP case, what percent of the total round trip time (from the output of the `echoping` command) is due to the connection establishment, before the echo request is even sent?
