## 5.6 UDP Exercises with Datagram Sizes


For this experiment, we will reuse the same network as in [Section 5.5](el5373-lab5-55.md). 

### Exercise 3

In this exercise, we'll observe IP fragmentation of UDP datagrams.

You'll need two terminal windows open on "romeo" and one open on "juliet".

First, run 

```
ifconfig eth1
```

on each host, and make a note of the MTU of the `eth1` interface on each. Now, we'll verify this value experimentally.

On "romeo", start `tcpdump` with 

```
sudo tcpdump -en -i eth1 "not tcp"
```

(Note that we use the `"not tcp"` filter to exclude the status/information data exchanged by `iperf3` over TCP. Also note that we are monitoring the output in real time, rather than saving to a file.)

In the second terminal window on "romeo", start an `iperf3` server with

```
iperf3 -s
```

While that is running, on "juliet" run

```
iperf3 -c romeo -u -k 1 -l 512
```

to send a UDP packet with a 512B payload. (Note that an Ethernet, IP, and UDP header will be added to the payload.) Observe the result in the `tcpdump` window, where both the payload length and the total size of the Ethernet frame is shown. (At the beginning of each `iperf3` transaction, you may observe two very small packets which establish that the server is listening on the specified port - you can ignore these packets.)

Repeat the `iperf3` client command, but increase the length of the payload by modifying the `-l` argument, until IP fragmentation occurs.

Stop the `tcpdump` with Ctrl+C. Then, start a new `tcpdump` on "romeo" with the capture saved to a file:

```
sudo tcpdump -enx -i eth1 -w $(hostname -s)-no-ip-fragment.pcap "not tcp"
```

Make sure the `iperf3` server is running on "romeo". Then, on "juliet", repeat the `iperf3` command to send a UDP datagram with the maximum payload length at which IP fragmentation does _not_ occur.

Stop `tcpdump` with Ctrl+C. Then, start a new `tcpdump` with


```
sudo tcpdump -enx -i eth1 -w $(hostname -s)-ip-fragment.pcap "not tcp"
```

and on "juliet", run

```
iperf3 -c romeo -u -k 1 -l 2048
```

Stop `tcpdump` and the `iperf3` server with Ctrl+C.

Transfer the packet captures to your laptop with `scp`.


**Lab report**: What is the maximum `iperf3` payload size (e.g. largest `-l` argument) that can be sent without IP fragmentation?

**Lab report**: Explain the maximum `iperf3` payload size in terms of MTU and header lengths. What headers are appended to the `iperf3` payload, and what size is each header?  Describe the total size (including payload + headers) at each layer.

**Lab report**: Explain the `tcpdump` output for the `iperf3` flow with `-l 2048` in terms of the IP header fields (i.e., id, offset, flags, length) that are used in fragmentation.

**Lab report**: When IP fragmentation occurs, only one of the fragments has the UDP header. How do you verify this fact from the `tcpdump` output?


### Exercise 4

In this exercise, we'll observe maximum payload size that can be sent in a UDP datagram.

You'll need on terminal window open on "romeo" and _two_ open on "juliet".

First, run 

```
iperf3 -s 
```

on "romeo".

On "juliet",  start `tcpdump` with 

```
sudo tcpdump -en -i eth1 "not tcp"
```

(Note that we use the `"not tcp"` filter to exclude the status/information data exchanged by `iperf3` over TCP. Also note that we are monitoring the output in real time, rather than saving to a file.)

In the second terminal window on "juliet", run

```
iperf3 -c romeo -u -k 1 -l 10000
```

Repeat the `iperf3` client command, but increase the length of the payload by modifying the `-l` argument, until the system refuses to send anything.


**Lab report**: What is the maximum size of the `iperf3` UDP payload that the system can send, even when fragmentation is allowed? Explain this value in terms of the header sizes and the "length" header field. (Hint: imagine an interface with a very large MTU, so that there is no IP fragmentation, and the entire payload is sent in a single UDP datagram. How many bits are allocated for the "length" field in the IP header? What is the maximum value that this field can hold? What limitation does this impose on underlying protocol layers?)

Once you are done with this part of the lab , proceed to the [next part](el-5373-lab5-58.md)
