## 6.10 Exercises on TCP timers and retransmission

For this experiment, we will reuse the same network as in the [previous experiment](el5373-lab6-67.md).

### Exercise 5

On "romeo", execute

```
sudo sysctl -A | grep keepalive
```

to display the default values of the TCP kernel parameters that are related to the TCP keepalive timer.

**Lab report**: What is the default value of the TCP keepalive timer? What is the maximum number of TCP keepalive probes a host can send?

To observe TCP keepalive packets, we will reduce the time before TCP begins sending keepalive packets. On "juliet", run

```
sudo sysctl -w net.ipv4.tcp_keepalive_time=60
```

Also, to observe TCP keepalive packets, the application must be configured to use them - on "juliet", run

```
sudo nano /etc/xinetd.d/telnet
```

to modify the `telnet` configuration file. Change the line

```
  flags = REUSE    
```

to

```
  flags = KEEPALIVE
```

To save the file, use Ctrl+O to write out to file (and hit Enter to confirm the output filename). Then use Ctrl+X to exit `nano`. Finally, run

```
sudo service xinetd restart  
```

to restart the `xinetd` service with the net `telnet` settings.

On juliet, start a `tcpdump`:


```
sudo tcpdump -S -i eth1 -w tcp-keepalive-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

Then, while `tcpdump` is capturing the traffic between "romeo" and "juliet", on "romeo", run

```
telnet 10.10.2.100
```

and enter the username and password when prompted. Don't type anything in the `telnet` session, and wait for the keepalive timer to elapse.

When you're finished, use 

```
exit
```

to end the telnet session. Then, restore the keepalive timer values to their defaults. Use a command similar to


```
sudo sysctl -w net.ipv4.tcp_keepalive_time=60
```

but instead of `60`, use the value you noted in Exercise 5.

**Lab report**: Explain how TCP keepalive works, using your `tcpdump` output.

### Exercise 6

Run `tcpdump` on _both end hosts_ to capture the packets between "romeo" and "juliet":

```
sudo tcpdump -S -s 68 -i eth1 -w tcp-connection-down-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

Note the `-s snaplen` argument, which tells `tcpdump` to capture `snaplen` bytes of each frame. 68 bytes should be sufficient to capture IP/UDP/TCP/ICMP headers, and by capturing only the headers, we keep the capture file small and make it easier to transfer from the remote host later.

Then, start an `iperf3` server instance on "juliet":

```
iperf3 -s
```

Then, on "romeo", run

```
iperf3 -c 10.10.2.100 -t 90
```

to send TCP traffic to "juliet".

While this is still running, we will temporarily break the connection between "romeo" and "juliet". On the "router" node, run

```
sudo ifconfig eth1 down
sudo ifconfig eth2 down
```

After about ten seconds have passed, restore the link with

```
sudo ifconfig eth1 up
sudo ifconfig eth2 up
```

Save the `tcpdump` output for the lab report.

**Lab report**: From the `tcpdump` output, identify when the connection was broken. Describe how the retransmission timer changes after sending each retransmitted packet, during the period when the connection was broken. Explain how the number of data segments that the sender transmits at once (before getting an ACK) changes after the connection is reestablished.
