## 6.8 Exercise on TCP interactive data flow

For this experiment, we will reuse the same network as in the [previous experiment](el5373-lab6-67.md).

### Exercise 3

On "juliet", start a `tcpdump`:

```
sudo tcpdump -S -i eth1 -w tcp-interactive-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

While `tcpdump` capturing the traffic between "romeo" and "juliet", issue the following command on "romeo":

```
telnet 10.10.2.100
```

Enter your username and password at the prompt. Then type

```
date
```

and press Enter.

Now, in order to generate data faster than the round-trip time of a single byte to be sent and echoed, type any sequence of keys in the `telnet` window very rapidly.

Save the `tcpdump` output for your lab report. Type 

```
exit
```

in the `telnet` session to end it.

**Lab report**: Answer the following questions, based on the `tcpdump` output saved in the above exercise:

1. What is a delayed acknowledgement? What is it used for?
2. Can you see any delayed acknowledgements in your `tcpdump` output? If yes, explain the reason. Mark some of the lines with delayed acknowledgements, and submit this with your report. Explain how the delayed ACK timer operates, using your `tcpdump` output. <br><br> If you don't see any delayed acknowledgements, explain the reason why none was observed.
3. What is the Nagle algorithm used for? From your `tcpdump` output, can you tell whether the Nagle algorithm is enabled or not? Give the reason for your answer. <br><br> From your `tcpdump` output for when you typed very rapidly can you see any segment that contains more than one character going from your workstation to the remote machine?
