## 7.4 Simple multicast exercise

For this experiment, we will use a topology with four hosts and one router, and IP addresses as follows:

* romeo - 10.10.1.100
* juliet - 10.10.1.101
* hamlet - 10.10.1.102
* ophelia - 10.10.2.103
* router - 10.10.1.1 and 10.10.2.1

with netmask 255.255.255.0. 

To set up this topology in the GENI Portal, create a slice, click on "Add Resources", and load the RSpec from the following URL: [https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ffund/tcp-ip-essentials/master/lab7/el5373-lab7-multicast-simple-rspec.xml](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ffund/tcp-ip-essentials/master/lab7/el5373-lab7-multicast-simple-rspec.xml)

Then bind to an InstaGENI site and reserve your resources. Wait for them to become available for login ("turn green" on your canvas) and then SSH into each, using the details given in the GENI Portal.

Next, we will set up these resources. On the router, we will install a simple multicast router that accepts static routes. Run:

```
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get -y install smcroute
```

Then start it with

```
sudo smcroute -d
```

Finally, we will add a route for the multicast group we will use throughout this section, 230.11.111.10. First, use `ifconfig` to check which interface on the router is connected to the 10.10.1.0/24 subnet, and which is connected to the 10.10.2.0/24 subnet. Then, run

```
sudo smcroute -a IFACE1 10.10.1.100 230.11.111.10 IFACE2
```

substituting the correct interface names - the name of the interface connected to the 10.10.1.0/24 subnet for `IFACE1`, and the name of the interface connected to 10.10.2.0/24 subnet for `IFACE2`. 

This will add a multicast route so that traffic from "romeo" (10.10.1.100) to 230.11.111.10 will be forwarded to `IFACE2`. (Note that this simple routing daemon will forward _all_ multicast traffic matching this rule, even if no hosts in the 10.10.2.0/24 subnet are subscribed to the multicast group. A more sophisticated router using PIM and IGMP will be able to selectively forward traffic only when needed.)

Recent Linux kernels are set up so that they will _not_ respond to ICMP messages addressed to a broadcast or multicast address. To change this setting, on each host and the router, run

```
sudo sysctl -w net.ipv4.icmp_echo_ignore_broadcasts=0
```

Before you start, use `ifconfig -a` to capture the network interface configuration of each host in this topology. Draw a diagram of the topology, and label each network interface with its name, IP address, and MAC address.


### Exercise 1

On "romeo", execute 

```
netstat -rn
```

to display the routing table. If there is no entry for the 224.0.0.0 subnet, provide a default route for multicast traffic, by:

```
sudo route add -net 224.0.0.0 netmask 240.0.0.0 dev eth1
```

and save the new routing table.

**Lab report**: Submit the routing table you saved.

We are planning to send traffic to the 224.0.0.0 multicast subnet over the experiment interface. Will the routing rule we added determine where traffic for this subnet is sent? Explain.

### Exercise 2

Execute

```
netstat -g
```

to show the multicast group memberships for all the interfaces on your host. You can also try with the `-n` argument, as

```
netstat -g -n
```

so as not to resolve hostnames.

**Lab report**: How many IPv4 multicast groups did each experiment interface belong to? What were the groups? Explain the meaning of the group IDs.

### Exercise 3

On "juliet", temporarily change the netmask of the experiment interface from 255.255.255.0 to 255.255.0.0, with

```
sudo ifconfig eth1 netmask 255.255.0.0
```

Note that with this change, juliet can still reach hosts on the 10.10.1.0/24 subnet. However, the broadcast address that juliet will respond to has changed. You can verify this by finding the `Bcast` value in the output of `ifconfig eth1`.

On "juliet", "hamlet", and "ophelia", run

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -n
```

and leave these running.

Then, on "romeo", execute

```
ping -c 3 -I eth1 224.0.0.1
```

Examine the output to see which hosts reply. Save this output for your lab report. Also save the output in the `tcpdump` sessions.

On "romeo", ping the broadcast address for the 10.10.1.0/24 subnet, using

```
ping -c 3 -b 10.10.1.255
```

Examine the output to see which hosts reply. Save this output for your lab report. Also save the output in the `tcpdump` sessions.

Use Ctrl+C to stop the `tcpdump`.

**Lab report**: Which hosts replied when the multicast address was pinged? Which hosts replied when the broadcast address was pinged? Explain.


### Exercise 4

On "juliet", restore the original netmask with

```
sudo ifconfig eth1 netmask 255.255.255.0
```

Also on "juliet", set up the multicast route with

```
sudo route add -net 224.0.0.0 netmask 240.0.0.0 eth1
```


Execute

```
sudo tcpdump -i eth1 -w simple-multicast-4-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

on "romeo" to capture all packets. Then, we will generate a few unicast, multicast, and broadcast frames.

On "juliet", run

```
ping -I eth1 -c 3 -b 10.10.1.255
```

to send a broadcast frame.

Also, run

```
ping -I eth1 -c 3 -b 255.255.255.255
```

to send a broadcast frame (with a different broadcast address).

Then, also on "juliet", run

```
ping -I eth1 -c 3 10.10.1.100
```

Next, still on "juliet", run

```
ping -I eth1 -c 3 230.11.111.10
```

to generate a multicast frame. Notice that this address gets mapped to the routing entry of Exercise 1, but no host is a member of this multicast group. Therefore, you will not get any echo replies, but you can still see the echo requests in your `tcpdump` output. 

Finally, on "juliet", run

```
ping -I eth1 -c 3 232.139.111.10
```

to generate a multicast frame with a different group address.

Use Ctrl+C to stop the `tcpdump`, and transfer the file to your laptop.

**Lab report**: Compare destination MAC addresses of the different types of ICMP echo request frames you captured. Explain how the destination MAC address field is used in each case.

**Lab report**: Use the frames with a multicast destination address to explain how a multicast group address is mapped to a multicast MAC address. For the two multicast frames captured, do they have the same destination MAC address? Why?

### Exercise 5

On each of "juliet", "ophelia", "hamlet", and "romeo", execute 

```
netstat -rn
```

to display the routing table. If there is no entry for the multicast address range, provide a default route for multicast traffic, by:

```
sudo route add -net 224.0.0.0 netmask 240.0.0.0 dev eth1
```

Then, start `iperf` listening on a multicast address on "juliet", "ophelia", and "hamlet":

```
iperf -s -B 230.11.111.10 -u -i 1
```

On the "router", use `ifconfig` to find out which interface is connected to the 10.10.1.0/24 network, then run

```
sudo tcpdump -en -i eth1 -w simple-multicast-5-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

substituting the name of the interface connected to the 10.10.1.0/24 network for `eth1` as appropriate. 

Then, on "romeo", run

```
iperf -c 230.11.111.10 -u -l 500 -n 5000 -T 2
```

to send 10 datagrams to the multicast address 230.11.111.10, with TTL of 2 (so that packets may traverse the router). Save the packet capture.

**Lab report**: From the `tcpdump` output, how many messages are sent on the network by `iperf`? From the output on each of the `iperf` server hosts, how many copies of each message was received?


### Exercise 6

On the "router", use `ifconfig` to find out which interface is connected to the 10.10.1.0/24 network, then run

```
sudo tcpdump -en -i eth1 -w simple-multicast-6-$(hostname -s).pcap
```

substituting the name of the interface connected to the 10.10.1.0/24 network for `eth1` as appropriate. 

Then, run

```
iperf -s -B 230.11.111.10 -u
```

on "juliet" _only_, and stop any running `iperf` instances on other hosts. 

Now, on "romeo", run

```
ping -c 3 230.11.111.10 -t 2
```

and make a note of which host(s) respond.

Leave the `iperf` server running on "juliet", but also run 

```
iperf -s -B 230.11.111.10 -u
```

on "hamlet".  On "romeo", run

```
ping -c 3 230.11.111.10 -t 2
```

and make a note of which host(s) respond.

Finally, leave the `iperf` servers running on "juliet" and "hamlet", but also run 

```
iperf -s -B 230.11.111.10 -u
```

on "ophelia".  On "romeo", run

```
ping -c 3 230.11.111.10 -t 2
```

and make a note of which host(s) respond.

Then terminate all `iperf` servers, and on "romeo", run 

```
ping -c 3 230.11.111.10 -t 2
```

**Lab report**: Explain which hosts responded to the `ping` in each instance, and why. 

What would you expect each host to have in the output of `netstat -g -n`, in each case?

Compare to the results of Exercise 4. 

Did "romeo" respond to its own `ping` requests? Why or why not?
